EMCO Stepper Control Board

Stephen Davies
September 2018

Introduction
------------
In August 2018 an EMCO Compact 5 CNC was donated to my makerspace by one
of the local high schools. The machine appeared in excellent condition for its
age. The spindle runs smoothly as does the cross-slide (X-axis). Unfortunately
the Z-axis failed to jog. Physically the motor was vibrating, indicating that
some stepping was being attempted, but no linear movement occurred.

After removing the Z-axis stepper motor from the lathe body further testing
indicated that unloaded the motor would rotate but stall when even the 
slightest amount of pressure was applied to the pulley.

Swapping the X and Z motor cables resulted in a failure of the cross-slide
(and Z-axis now worked), suggesting that there was a fault in the stepper
motor driver board (A6A 113 001). After attempting to test the board in-situ
I gave up and removed it from the chassis. Bench testing is much simpler.

The board was in excellent condition. The only physical damage was some
evidence of overheating of the 1N5404 diode between the 10V supply rail and
the E output.

The board schematics are available in the same folder as this document, it
is suggested that you print off a copy of each of the four pages and 'stitch'
them together so you can follow the next bit. The file names include 
'A6A113000' but all seem to be for the A6A113001 model. I found the
schematic to be consistent with the PCB.

On the subject of part numbers, I found the PCB had A6A 113020 in the top
layer copper and A6A113001 in the top layer silkscreen.

Circuit Overview
----------------
The Compact 5 CNC uses unipolar stepper motors. Based on other posts and 
documents they are 72 steps per revolution, i.e. 5 degree/step. There are
two windings, each with 3 wires. Winding pairs are A, C, E (centre) and
B, D, F (centre) respectively.

The driver circuit board (Schrittmotorplatine) is designed in two halves
- a low voltage logic section, powered by the CPU board, and a high voltage
motor control section powered from the main power supply. The two halves
are electrically isolated using optocouplers OK1-OK8.

The board mounts below the main CPU board and connects directly via two
right angle 0.1" SIL pin headers. Each SIL header has 6 pins, a, b, c, d,
ground and +5 volts. Note terminology, lower case for inputs, upper case
for outputs.

Inputs a, b, c and d are direct controls for the stepper motor windings. 
Signals a and c are complementary, i.e. 180 degrees out of phase. Same goes
for b and d. Signals a and b are 90 degrees out of phase. Each signal will
be a square wave with a 50% duty cycle when the motors are stepping.

Motor control uses a bi-level voltage pulse. When the motor is first
activated its centre tap (E or F) is connected to 50 volts. The current
in the motor winding is monitored and when it reaches 3 amps the 50
volt level is removed, being replaced by 10 volts.

The descriptions given below use the a & c signals in the Z-axis section
of the board. For reasons of symmetry it isn't necessary to describe the
b & d signals or the X-axis.

Low Side Power Control
----------------------
For analysis purposes each channel can be divided into two smaller sections,
one dealing with the low side drivers, i.e. connection between motor coil
and ground, and the the high side, dealing with the step pulse and
holding current.

Inputs a & c arrive on X34/1 and X34/3 respectively. They pass into a
NAND based RS latch implemented using a 74LS38. Presumably the latch
is present to guarantee that disconnected inputs result in either
output A or C being activated but not both.

Following the output from IC1/3, the inverted signal (/a) drives one
channel of OK1 (pins 1/2). When a is high the optocoupler is activated
and the output transistor is switched on. This in turn enables the BC556
switch, which in turn drives the Darlington pair formed by the BD139/BD245B
transistors. When enabled, the BD245B provides a high current path to ground.

So, when input a (X34/1) is high, output A (X31/3) is
pulled to ground. When input a is low, output A is disconnected.

High Side Power Control
-----------------------
The high side implements a bi-level motor driver. When first activated output E
is connected to 50V. Once the current through the coil reaches 3 amps the
output is disconnected from 50V and is switched passively (using diodes) to 10V.

The complicated looking circuitry around ICs 2,3 and 4 is used to control the
high pulse and current feedback loop. A word of warning, the schematic uses an
unusual symbol for ICs 3, 4, 7 & 8, they are NOR gates.

Following though from the a input on the Z axis - signal /a connects directly 
to IC3/2 and indirectly to IC2/5, a schmitt trigger inverter, via an RC
network. Looks complicated until you realise that this forms a negative edge
detector. Looking for a negative edge on /a is equivalent to looking for a
positive edge on a. Every time there is a positive edge on the a input there
is a short length, high going pulse, output by IC3/3.

This is repeated for input c using IC3/5 and IC2/9. The resulting pulse stream
being output on IC3/4. Two 1N4148 diodes form what is known as a wire-OR,
mixing the edge pulses for the a and c inputs. The combined pulses are what
trigger output E being connected to 50V.

NOR gates IC4/3 and IC4/11 form a NOR RS latch. Note that this uses positive
logic pulses to activate, unlike the NAND RS latch formed by IC1. IC4/13
is the S (set) input, IC4/1 is the R (reset) input. IC4/3 is the latch
output Q.

The positive pulse stream, from the a/c positive edges, turns Q on (high).
This in turn switches on the BC548 which turns on OK4/3. This turns on
the BC546, leading to activation of the Darlington pair BD140 and TIP2955.
This connects output E to the 50V supply. 

To prevent overcurrent there is a 0.22 ohm resistor connected to the
TIP2955 emitter. Voltage across this resistor is proportional to the
winding current. When the current reaches 3A the resistor voltage will be
around 0.6V, enough to discharge the RC network (220/1uF) connected to
a BC556 and turn the transistor on. This is then fed back via OK3/1.
Strangley, the feedback signal for over current in the E output is used
to disconnect the F output from 50V.

This crossover I cannot explain. I'd have thought that high current in the
E output would result in the high side driver for E being turned off.

Testing
-------
Bench testing of the driver board was performed using Henk's suggested
network of resistors and LEDs, a couple of bench supplies and an Arduino
as a signal generator. The Arduino source code is provided as a separate
peer file to this document.

Initial testing showed that both high and low side power transistors in
the Z-axis A channel had blown. These were replaced, along with the heat
affected diode mentioned previously.

Found a replacement for the TIP2955 easily enough, only difference being a
change in case. Apparently the original TO-218 case has been replaced by
the TO-247 case. They look a little different but are mechanically identical.

Replacing the BD245B is hampered by the fact that they appear to be
obsolete. Element14, RS and Digikey had no stock (or record of the part
number). Found some from an eBay vendor in France but was not prepared to
pay the postage or wait 3 weeks. Eventually went with a TIP35C in a TO-247
case. Guess time will tell if I got the substitution right.

Before refitting the board I checked the stepper motor and found that
3 of the poles measured in at 4.7 ohms, the fourth at 0.9 ohms.

Further Testing
---------------
After writing this up I confess to a nagging doubt about the winding current
feedback loop. The E/F crossover still isn't making any sense.

Also, due to equipment limitations I was unable to test the over current
portion of the circuit on the bench.

What if the overcurrent circuit failed first, cooking the winding followed
by the transistors?

Guess that's a job for another day.
